Adding getting started instructions for GKE, Istio, and Kgateway (#577)
kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api-inference-extension: site-src/guides/index.md

> This quickstart guide is intended for engineers familiar with k8s and model servers (vLLM in this instance). The goal of this guide is to get a first, single InferencePool up and running! 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This quickstart guide is intended for engineers familiar with k8s and model servers (vLLM in this instance). The goal of this guide is to get an Inference Gateway up and running! 
```

Reviewer: Recommend adding another section above this:

```
??? example "Experimental"

    This project is still in an alpha state and breaking changes may occur in the future.
```

This relies on [mkdocs-material Admonitions](https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material/reference/admonitions/), something we haven't used in this project quite yet. It will need some corresponding [updates to mkdocs.yml](https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material/reference/admonitions/#configuration).

Author: done :)

   ```

### Deploy Inference Gateway

   Choose one of the following options to deploy an Inference Gateway.

=== "GKE"

      1. Enable the Gateway API and configure proxy-only subnets when necessary. See [Deploy Gateways](https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/how-to/deploying-gateways) 
      for detailed instructions.

      1. Deploy Gateway and HealthCheckPolicy resources

         ```bash
         kubectl apply -f https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api-inference-extension/raw/main/config/manifests/gateway/gke/gateway.yaml
         kubectl apply -f https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api-inference-extension/raw/main/config/manifests/gateway/gke/healthcheck.yaml
         ```

         Confirm that the Gateway was assigned an IP address and reports a `Programmed=True` status:
         ```bash
         $ kubectl get gateway inference-gateway
         NAME                CLASS               ADDRESS         PROGRAMMED   AGE
         inference-gateway   inference-gateway   <MY_ADDRESS>    True         22s
         ```

=== "Istio"

      Please note that this feature is currently in an experimental phase and is not intended for production use. 

>       The implementation and user experience are subject to changes as we continue to iterate on this project.

Reviewer 2: I believe this is not unique to istio, but we only include this in istio. Any recommendations how to rephrase re-anchor this comment? 

@kfswain @ahg-g @robscott @nicolexin ?

Reviewer: I think it's still worth leaving a small Istio-specific note here, but I added a recommendation for an experimental disclaimer at the top of the guide. @LiorLieberman up to you on what this should say if we have an overall disclaimer above.

Reviewer 2: Thanks, we can leave it like this then

      1. Install Istio
      
         ```
         TAG=1.26-alpha.80c74f7f43482c226f4f4b10b4dda6261b67a71f
         # on Linux
         wget https://storage.googleapis.com/istio-build/dev/$TAG/istioctl-$TAG-linux-amd64.tar.gz
         tar -xvf istioctl-$TAG-linux-amd64.tar.gz
         # on macOS
         wget https://storage.googleapis.com/istio-build/dev/$TAG/istioctl-$TAG-osx.tar.gz
         tar -xvf istioctl-$TAG-osx.tar.gz
         # on Windows
         wget https://storage.googleapis.com/istio-build/dev/$TAG/istioctl-$TAG-win.zip
         unzip istioctl-$TAG-win.zip

         ./istioctl install --set tag=$TAG --set hub=gcr.io/istio-testing
         ```

      1. If you run the Endpoint Picker (EPP) with TLS (with `--secureServing=true`), it is currently using a self-signed certificate 
      and the gateway cannot successfully validate the CA signature and the SAN. Apply the destination rule to bypass verification as 

>       a temporary workaround. A better TLS implementation is being discussed in [Issue 582](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api-inference-extension/issues/582).

Reviewer 2: I want this to indicate that this problem is not unique to istio. And other implementations are doing the same thing implicitly. Any ideas how it is best to communicate that? 

@robscott @danehans

Reviewer: Maybe something like this?

```suggestion
      1. If you run the Endpoint Picker (EPP) with the `--secureServing` flag set to `true`, it is currently using a self-signed certificate. As a security measure, Istio does not trust self-signed certificates by default. As a temporary workaround, you can apply the destination rule to bypass TLS verification for EPP. A more secure TLS implementation in EPP is being discussed in [Issue 582](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api-inference-extension/issues/582).
```

As far as I can tell, this setting is not enabled by default, so it may be worth hiding this in a [collapsible admonition](https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material/reference/admonitions/#collapsible-blocks).

Reviewer 2: It is the default - https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api-inference-extension/blob/61125a818d5a26addb3acf7a9b099cba82976761/cmd/epp/main.go#L88-L89

Reviewer 2: But, my comment is more about the fact that all implementations (keep me honest for gke) are configuring envoy to accept untrusted certificate (which is what DestRule is doing in this case) so only mentioning it here is slightly misleading

Author: Yes, TLS is enabled by default for EPP. I agree it is slightly misleading here as we only mention it for Istio. However, I also feel like it is redundant to say in other implementations that they do accept untrusted certificates so there is no AI required from the users, especially if a more secure TLS implementation is coming soon.

Reviewer: @LiorLieberman My goal with the suggestion was to highlight that Istio's TLS verification is a positive/helpful feature. IMO, the only time neutral OSS docs should point out a shortcoming of an implementation is if that implementation is failing to do something required by the API, that's not the case here.

Reviewer 2: I am good with this suggestion Rob, thanks.

I think its misleading to not include it only here as others dont see this when they are not on the istio tab. 

But happy to move forward with this as well if thats the preference.

         ```

      1. Deploy Gateway

         ```bash
         kubectl apply -f https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api-inference-extension/raw/main/config/manifests/gateway/istio/gateway.yaml
         ```

      1. Label the gateway

         ```bash
         kubectl label gateway llm-gateway istio.io/enable-inference-extproc=true
         ```

      1. Confirm that the Gateway was assigned an IP address and reports a `Programmed=True` status:
      
         ```bash
         $ kubectl get gateway inference-gateway
         NAME                CLASS               ADDRESS         PROGRAMMED   AGE
         inference-gateway   inference-gateway   <MY_ADDRESS>    True         22s
         ```

=== "Kgateway"

      [Kgateway](https://kgateway.dev/) v2.0.0 adds support for inference extension as a **technical preview**. This means do not
      run Kgateway with inference extension in production environments. Refer to [Issue 10411](https://github.com/kgateway-dev/kgateway/issues/10411)
      for the list of caveats, supported features, etc.

      1. Requirements

         - [Helm](https://helm.sh/docs/intro/install/) installed.

>          - Gateway API [CRDs](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/guides/#installing-gateway-api) installed.

Reviewer: @LiorLieberman I believe this should be part of the Istio guide as well?

Reviewer 2: assuming this comment is anchored only to gateway-apis crds installation and not helm - yes. we do need that. 

and you do need that before the installing with istioctl

can also do this - but not great we are tying to version (1.2.1)
```
kubectl get crd gateways.gateway.networking.k8s.io &> /dev/null || \
  { kubectl kustomize "github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/config/crd?ref=v1.2.1" | kubectl apply -f -; }
```

Author: I updated the instructions to include the installation of Gateway CRDs, same as Kgateway.

### Install the Inference Extension CRDs

   ```bash

>    kubectl apply -f https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api-inference-extension/releases/download/v0.2.0/manifests.yaml

Reviewer 3: Recommend to define a VERSION variable so that we can use it here and potentially in other places (the helm chart version), this makes it easy to update on each release.

Also, we need to keep this to show how to install the dev version (perhaps as a second tab), the instruction would be (instead of the two kubectl apply commands we have now):
```
kubectl apply -k https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api-inference-extension/config/crd
```

Author: updated with 2 tabs, Latest release vs Dev version!

         ```

      1. Label the gateway

         ```bash
         kubectl label gateway llm-gateway istio.io/enable-inference-extproc=true
         ```

      1. Confirm that the Gateway was assigned an IP address and reports a `Programmed=True` status:
      
         ```bash
         $ kubectl get gateway inference-gateway
         NAME                CLASS               ADDRESS         PROGRAMMED   AGE
         inference-gateway   inference-gateway   <MY_ADDRESS>    True         22s
         ```

=== "Kgateway"

      [Kgateway](https://kgateway.dev/) v2.0.0 adds support for inference extension as a **technical preview**. This means do not
      run Kgateway with inference extension in production environments. Refer to [Issue 10411](https://github.com/kgateway-dev/kgateway/issues/10411)
      for the list of caveats, supported features, etc.

      1. Requirements

         - [Helm](https://helm.sh/docs/intro/install/) installed.
         - Gateway API [CRDs](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/guides/#installing-gateway-api) installed.

      1. Install Kgateway CRDs

         ```bash

>          helm upgrade -i --create-namespace --namespace kgateway-system --version v2.0.0-main kgateway-crds https://github.com/danehans/toolbox/raw/refs/heads/main/charts/338661f3be-kgateway-crds-1.0.1-dev.tgz

Reviewer 4: So this link won't work when there are updates to this repo. We should pin this to a specific commit. I'm not sure which is the right one just yet, let me dig into this and get back to you tomorrow.

Reviewer 5: Yes, we'll want to use the v0.2.0 tag when the release is cut and do the same with the Helm repository.

Reviewer 3: should we proceed with this PR and create an issue to followup with the fix?

Reviewer: @christian-posta do you have a rough time on Friday in mind for Kgateway release?

Reviewer 4: Yeah, RC-1 will come out later tonight, and Final should be cut Friday/Saturday. I can speed it up and get it Friday afternoon if things look good. 

I think my plan will be to get the inference extension verified right now on kgateway 2.0-main and then just update the instructions here as though there's a v2.0.0 tag. If we have any issues after that's cut and this goes out, we'll just submit a new PR to fix it.

Reviewer 4: Okay so i have the following instructions working on my end, and we can update this guide to reflect this:

> kubectl apply -f llm/gpu-deployment.yaml

```bash
VERSION=v0.2.0
kubectl apply -f https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api-inference-extension/releases/download/$VERSION/manifests.yaml
```
> kubectl apply -f inference/inferencemodel.yaml
> kubectl apply -f inference/inferencepool.yaml

> helm upgrade -i --create-namespace --namespace kgateway-system --version v2.0.0 kgateway-crds oci://cr.kgateway.dev/kgateway-dev/charts/kgateway-crds

> helm upgrade -i --namespace kgateway-system --version v2.0.0 kgateway oci://cr.kgateway.dev/kgateway-dev/charts/kgateway \
  --set inferenceExtension.enabled=true 

> kubectl apply -f inference/gateway.yaml

> kubectl apply -f inference/httproute.yaml

try and call:
./call-gateway.sh

Author: I have now updated the Kgateway instructions, PTAL!

         inference-gateway   inference-gateway   <MY_ADDRESS>    True         22s
         ```

=== "Istio"

      Please note that this feature is currently in an experimental phase and is not intended for production use. 
      The implementation and user experience are subject to changes as we continue to iterate on this project.

      1.  Requirements

         - Gateway API [CRDs](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/guides/#installing-gateway-api) installed.

      1. Install Istio
      
         ```
         TAG=1.26-alpha.80c74f7f43482c226f4f4b10b4dda6261b67a71f
         # on Linux
         wget https://storage.googleapis.com/istio-build/dev/$TAG/istioctl-$TAG-linux-amd64.tar.gz
         tar -xvf istioctl-$TAG-linux-amd64.tar.gz
         # on macOS
         wget https://storage.googleapis.com/istio-build/dev/$TAG/istioctl-$TAG-osx.tar.gz
         tar -xvf istioctl-$TAG-osx.tar.gz
         # on Windows
         wget https://storage.googleapis.com/istio-build/dev/$TAG/istioctl-$TAG-win.zip
         unzip istioctl-$TAG-win.zip

         ./istioctl install --set tag=$TAG --set hub=gcr.io/istio-testing
         ```

>       1. If you run the Endpoint Picker (EPP) with the `--secureServing` flag set to `true`, it is currently using a self-signed certificate. As a security measure, Istio does not trust self-signed certificates by default. As a temporary workaround, you can apply the destination rule to bypass TLS verification for EPP. A more secure TLS implementation in EPP is being discussed in [Issue 582](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api-inference-extension/issues/582).

Reviewer: Maybe add this for clarity:
```suggestion
      1. If you run the Endpoint Picker (EPP) with the `--secureServing` flag set to `true` (the default mode), it is currently using a self-signed certificate. As a security measure, Istio does not trust self-signed certificates by default. As a temporary workaround, you can apply the destination rule to bypass TLS verification for EPP. A more secure TLS implementation in EPP is being discussed in [Issue 582](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api-inference-extension/issues/582).
```

         gcloud container clusters update <CLUSTER_NAME> \
             --location=<CLUSTER_LOCATION> \
             --gateway-api=standard
         ```

      1. Create the proxy-only subnet
      
         A proxy-only subnet provides a set of IP addresses that Google uses to run Envoy proxies on your behalf. 
         ```
         gcloud compute networks subnets create proxy-only-subnet \
             --purpose=REGIONAL_MANAGED_PROXY \
             --role=ACTIVE \
             --region=<REGION> \
             --network=<VPC_NETWORK_NAME> \
             --range=<CIDR_RANGE>
         ```

      1. Deploy Gateway, HTTPRoute and HealthCheckPolicy resources

         ```bash
         kubectl apply -f https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api-inference-extension/raw/main/config/manifests/gateway/gke/resources.yaml
         ```

         Confirm that the Gateway was assigned an IP address and reports a `Programmed=True` status:
         ```bash
         $ kubectl get gateway inference-gateway
         NAME                CLASS               ADDRESS         PROGRAMMED   AGE
         inference-gateway   inference-gateway   <MY_ADDRESS>    True         22s
         ```

=== "Istio"

> 

Reviewer 2: can we add a note that this is experimental and users should NOT use it for any production environment. Also that the implementation/UX is likely to change as we iterate on the project.

Thoughts? 
@robscott @howardjohn

Author: Updated, PTAL and let me know if we need any updates!

      1. Install Istio
      

>       Follow the Istio installation guide https://istio.io/latest/docs/setup/install/

Reviewer 2: note - this will need to be slightly different as the release to be from a branch, and not master. will update once it is released

             --purpose=REGIONAL_MANAGED_PROXY \
             --role=ACTIVE \
             --region=<REGION> \
             --network=<VPC_NETWORK_NAME> \
             --range=<CIDR_RANGE>
         ```

      1. Deploy Gateway and HealthCheckPolicy resources

         ```bash
         kubectl apply -f https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api-inference-extension/raw/main/config/manifests/gateway/gke/gateway.yaml
         kubectl apply -f https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api-inference-extension/raw/main/config/manifests/gateway/gke/healthcheck.yaml
         ```

         Confirm that the Gateway was assigned an IP address and reports a `Programmed=True` status:
         ```bash
         $ kubectl get gateway inference-gateway
         NAME                CLASS               ADDRESS         PROGRAMMED   AGE
         inference-gateway   inference-gateway   <MY_ADDRESS>    True         22s
         ```

=== "Istio"

      Please note that this feature is currently in an experimental phase and is not intended for production use. 
      The implementation and user experience are subject to changes as we continue to iterate on this project.

      1. Install Istio
      

>          Please follow the [Istio installation guide](https://istio.io/latest/docs/setup/install/).

Reviewer: @LiorLieberman don't users need to use a specific branch of Istio to get this functionality?

Reviewer 2: They do, I left that comment above, waiting for a release.

Reviewer 2: after release is there, I would just point to an installation guide with overriding the images tag.

   The following cleanup assumes you would like to clean ALL resources that were created in this quickstart guide.  
   please be careful not to delete resources you'd like to keep.
   ```bash

>    kubectl delete -f https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api-inference-extension/raw/main/config/manifests/gateway/gke/gateway.yaml --ignore-not-found

Reviewer 3: Can we please split it into three please: 
- `Uninstall the InferencePool` (uninstalls the InferencePool and InferenceModels)
- `Uninstall the gateway` (uninstalls the httproute and gateway)
- `Uninstall the APIs` (uninstalls the CRDs)

### Cleanup

   The following cleanup assumes you would like to clean ALL resources that were created in this quickstart guide.  
   Please be careful not to delete resources you'd like to keep.

   1. Uninstall the Inference Pool

   ```bash
   kubectl delete -f https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api-inference-extension/raw/main/config/manifests/inferencepool.yaml --ignore-not-found
   kubectl delete -f https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api-inference-extension/raw/main/config/manifests/inferencemodel.yaml --ignore-not-found
   kubectl delete -f https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api-inference-extension/raw/main/config/manifests/vllm/cpu-deployment.yaml --ignore-not-found
   kubectl delete -f https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api-inference-extension/raw/main/config/manifests/vllm/gpu-deployment.yaml --ignore-not-found
   kubectl delete secret hf-token --ignore-not-found
   ```

   1. Uninstall the Gateway

   ```bash

>    kubectl delete -f https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api-inference-extension/raw/main/config/manifests/gateway/gke/gateway.yaml --ignore-not-found
>    kubectl delete -f https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api-inference-extension/raw/main/config/manifests/gateway/gke/healthcheck.yaml --ignore-not-found

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   kubectl delete -k https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api-inference-extension/raw/main/config/manifests/gateway/gke --ignore-not-found
```

Author: I don't have kustomize configurations for these gateway manifests, so this replacement won't work. We only have kustomize configurations for the CRDs here: https://github.com/nicolexin/gateway-api-inference-extension/tree/userguide/config/crd.

>    kubectl delete -f https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api-inference-extension/raw/main/config/manifests/gateway/istio/gateway.yaml --ignore-not-found
>    kubectl delete -f https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api-inference-extension/raw/main/config/manifests/gateway/istio/destination-rule.yaml --ignore-not-found

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   kubectl delete -k https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api-inference-extension/raw/main/config/manifests/gateway/istio --ignore-not-found
```

>    kubectl delete -f https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api-inference-extension/raw/main/config/manifests/gateway/kgateway/gateway.yaml --ignore-not-found
>    kubectl delete -f https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api-inference-extension/raw/main/config/manifests/gateway/httproute.yaml --ignore-not-found

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   kubectl delete -k https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api-inference-extension/raw/main/config/manifests/gateway/kgateway --ignore-not-found
```

Author: Same as above, this replacement won't work here.

   ```

   1. Uninstall the CRDs

   ```bash

>    kubectl delete -f https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api-inference-extension/raw/main/config/crd/bases/inference.networking.x-k8s.io_inferencepools.yaml --ignore-not-found
>    kubectl delete -f https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api-inference-extension/raw/main/config/crd/bases/inference.networking.x-k8s.io_inferencemodels.yaml --ignore-not-found
>    kubectl delete -k https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api-inference-extension/config/crd --ignore-not-found

Reviewer: Uninstalling CRDs will also delete all CRs based on them, so can simplify to this:
```suggestion
   kubectl delete -k https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api-inference-extension/config/crd --ignore-not-found
```

Author: done :)
